=head1 NAME

Dongry::Type::PerlEUCText - Dongry data types for texts encoded in EUC-JP

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The C<Dongry::Type::PerlEUCText> module defines data types for handing
textual data eucoded in Perl C<euc-jp> encoding in Dongry.

=head1 DATA TYPES

=over 4

=item perl_euc_text

Perl -> SQL: The input must be a character string or the C<undef>
value.  If the input is a string, it is encoded in the Perl C<euc-jp>
encoding.

SQL -> Perl: The input must be a byte string or the C<undef> value.
If the input is a string, it is decoded as a text in the Perl
C<euc-jp> encoding.

The Perl C<undef> value represents the C<NULL> value of SQL.

This data type should be used when a textual data encoded in (Perl
variant of) EUC-JP character encoding is stored in the column.

=item perl_euc_text_as_ref

Perl -> SQL: The input must be a reference to a character string or
the C<undef> value.  If the input is a reference to a string, it is
dereferenced and then encoded in the Perl C<euc-jp> encoding.

SQL -> Perl: The input must be a byte string or the C<undef> value.
If the input is a string, it is decoded as a text in the Perl
C<euc-jp> encoding and then a reference to it is returned.

The Perl C<undef> value represents the C<NULL> value of SQL.

This data type might be useful when the column is known to handle a
large length of textual data encoded in (Perl variant of) EUC-JP
character encoding.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Dongry::Type>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Wakaba <w@suika.fam.cx>.

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright 2011 Wakaba <w@suika.fam.cx>.

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
